Hardball: When Major League Baseball investigators came to town
XXXXX
JULIE K. BROWN
XXXXX
Oct. 6, 2013
XXXXX
They banged on doors, slipped through guard gates and flashed envelopes stuffed with cash. They hired a peddler of performance enhancing substances, paid for stolen documents and canoodled with a potential witness.

Major League Baseball’s sleuths, most of them former New York City cops, were described by one witness as “goons” with “big muscles” who bullied their way across South Florida in a quest to nail players involved in baseball’s biggest doping scandal.

In their zeal to clean up the sport, MLB investigators have been accused of discarding the rulebook much like the juiced-up ballplayers they were pursuing.

As New York Yankees slugger Alex Rodriguez tries to salvage his career and sullied reputation — the appeal of his 211-game drug suspension was heard this past week in New York — his spare-no-expense legal team has hammered away at the integrity of MLB’s case by accusing baseball’s investigators of “despicable, unethical and possibly illegal” tactics. In their latest gambit, they filed suit last Thursday, alleging MLB waged a vendetta against Rodriguez, its highest-paid player.

Rodriguez, considered a repeat offender of baseball’s steroid prohibition, and others claim MLB’s tactics included filing a “sham” lawsuit against a slew of people who have never donned a major league uniform, masquerading as cops, friends or process servers to gain access to would-be witnesses, and, allegedly, purchasing private medical records that had been stolen in a parking lot smash-and-grab.

“Even if the players broke the rules by using PEDs, that does not excuse baseball’s misconduct,” said Miami attorney Jeffrey R. Sonn, who represents Rodriguez’s cousin, Yuri Sucart. “If you threaten witnesses and offer bribes to cooperate, it trashes the game just as bad as what they say the players are doing.”

Sucart, 51, who lives in South Miami, is on the list of clients of Biogenesis of America, the now-closed Coral Gables anti-aging clinic run that provided professional and high school athletes alike with performance-enhancing drug concoctions. That, plus Sucart’s family connection to Rodriguez and his link to a previous PED episode involving the third baseman, put him on the radar of baseball investigators.

Anthony Bosch, who founded Biogenesis, was a much bigger fish. The 50-year-old, who led people to believe he was a doctor but wasn’t one, initially denied he supplied any athletes with steroids, then changed his story and is now working on MLB’s team. In exchange for his help, MLB promised to pay him an undisclosed sum of money — Rodriguez’s suit claims it is up to $5 million, in monthly installments — to cover his legal fees and other expenses.

It also pledged to put in a good word for him with criminal prosecutors investigating the clinic.

Bosch’s cooperation, buttressed by documents and other evidence MLB purchased or otherwise collected, led Commissioner Bud Selig to suspend more than a dozen players, including two former Most Valuable Players: Rodriguez and Milwaukee Brewers outfielder Ryan Braun. The players all accepted their penalties except Rodriguez, whose 211-game ban was the harshest punishment. After hearing evidence last week, an arbitrator will decide whether the ban stands.
XXXXX
XXXXX
Baseball: Rodriguez sues MLB over doping probe
XXXXX
Agence France-Presse
XXXXX
Oct. 4, 2013
XXXXX
New York Yankees star Alex Rodriguez filed a lawsuit Friday against Major League Baseball for allegedly buying the testimony of a key witness in the doping case built against him.

The filing, made in New York State Supreme Court, claims that Major League Baseball commissioner Bud Selig and others in the organization are trying to "improperly marshal evidence that they hope to use to destroy the reputation and career of Alex Rodriguez."

A closed-door arbitration hearing has been conducted this week at the New York offices of Major League Baseball regarding the 211-game suspension imposed against Rodriguez by Selig.

Selig says the superstar tried to impede the investigation into the Biogenesis clinic doping scandal, the biggest black eye to a sport that has endured doping damage for more than a decade.

The Biogenesis scandal has prompted 13 suspensions of at least 50 games, one of the stars banned being 2011 National League Most Valuable Player Ryan Braun.

Rodriguez, the active leader in career home runs with 654, appealed the ban and was able to play out the final weeks of the season as a result. A decision is expected on the suspension before the start of 2014 pre-season workouts.

"A-Rod" did not name the Yankees in the 31-page lawsuit, which seeks damages that would be determined at trial.

Rodriguez's lawsuit claims Selig wants to make an example of him and "to gloss over Selig's past inaction and tacit approval of the use of performance enhancing substances in baseball ... in an attempt to secure his legacy as the 'savior' of America's pastime."

Rodriguez claims Major League Baseball is paying Anthony Bosch, who ran the clinic suspected as the source of the performance-enhancing drugs, $5 million for his information against Rodriguez and paid $150,000 for records from the clinic.

He says the league has leaked damaging information about Rodriguez to the media in violation of a confidentiality agreement and that investigators have bribed and intimidated witnesses and at least once impersonated police officers.

Rodriguez rips Selig in the lawsuit, saying he willingly turned a blind eye to doping in the sport to help it recover from a labor dispute that wiped out the 1994 World Series and reversed course only after pressure from US lawmakers in 2006.

Major League Baseball issued a statement in response to the lawsuit, claiming Rodriguez has violated confidentiality agreements as well as doping rules.

"This lawsuit is a clear violation of the confidentiality provisions of our drug program and it is nothing more than a desperate attempt to circumvent the Collective Bargaining Agreement," the statement said.

"While we vehemently deny the allegations in the complaint, none of those allegations is relevant to the real issue: whether Mr. Rodriguez violated the Joint Drug Prevention and Treatment Program by using and possessing numerous forms of prohibited performance-enhancing substances, including testosterone and human growth hormone over the course of multiple years and whether he violated the basic agreement by attempting to cover-up his violations of the program by engaging in a course of conduct intended to obstruct and frustrate the Office of the Commissioner's investigation."
XXXXX
XXXXX
Faced with baseball’s longest doping suspension Yankees slugger A-Rod sues MLB for Biogenesis 'witch hunt'
XXXXX
ASSOCIATED PRESS REPORTER
XXXXX
Oct. 4, 2013
XXXXX
Alex Rodriguez has sued Major League Baseball and its commissioner, saying they are trying to destroy his reputation and career.
Rodriguez took a swing for the fences and accused Major League Baseball and Commissioner Bud Selig of pursuing him in a 'witch hunt' designed to smear Rodriguez’ character and cost him tens of millions of dollars.

The lawsuit was filed Thursday in New York State Supreme Court by lawyers for the Yankees third baseman.
It seeks unspecified compensatory and punitive damages for what it alleges was a relentless campaign by the league and Selig to 'destroy the reputation and career of Alex Rodriguez.'

The suit claims Selig and MLB tried to smear Rodriguez’s reputation to 'gloss over' Selig’s past inaction and tacit approval of the use of performance-enhancing substances in baseball, which the lawsuit said had turned the 'Golden Age of Baseball' into the 'Golden Age of Steroids.' 
The lawsuit said Selig hoped to redeem himself and secure his legacy as the “savior” of America’s pastime.
Rodriguez is appealing a 211-game suspension for violating baseball's drug agreement and labor contract.
XXXXX
XXXXX
Baseball hopes doping scandal will boost its case
XXXXX
Julian Linden
XXXXX
Sep. 6, 2013
XXXXX
The Biogenesis doping scandal that has rocked Major League Baseball could have a positive effect on the sport's bid to be reinstated to the Olympics, according to officials leading the push.

Although the sport's reputation was badly tarnished when more than a dozen top players were suspended for their links to the Biogenesis clinic accused of supplying performance-enhancing drugs, the World Baseball Softball Confederation believes it could turn out to be a blessing in disguise.

WBSC co-President Don Porter said the stiff penalties handed out by MLB, which had been accused in the past of turning a blind eye to doping, were proof that the sport was cleaning up its act.

"Doping is not exclusive to baseball," Porter told a news conference on Friday.

"I think many sports have that problem and we have to compliment the MLB because they're working very hard."

Baseball and softball were on the Olympic program from 1992 to 2008 but were kicked out for last year's London Games after a secret vote, held in 2005.

Although the International Olympic Committee (IOC) did not specify exactly why the sports were given the boot, several IOC members have cited the sport's refusal to comply with all the World Anti-Doping Agency rules among the reasons.

Baseball and softball have struck out twice in their joint attempts to get back on the Olympic program and are back at the plate for another shot, short-listed along with wrestling and squash for readmission in 2020.

The IOC will vote on Sunday to decide which sport gets back in and Porter believes the stiff action taken by the MLB could swing things towards baseball and softball.

"They're doing a lot of things: their testing program, sanctions," Porter said.

"They're working at it. They're really doing something to try to eradicate the problem."

Porter said the WBSC bidding team, which includes the son of former Cuban president Fidel Castro, were also optimistic that MLB would find a way to release some of its players to compete at the Olympics.

ABSENT STARS

The absence of MLB stars was regarded as another reason for the sport's expulsion and MLB commissioner Bud Selig has already ruled out the possibility that the league would temporarily shut down its season for the Olympics.

Many of the top players from the National Basketball Association, including four-times MVP LeBron James, compete at the Olympics because it does not clash with NBA season.

The National Hockey League agreed to take a mid-season break to allow its players to appear at next year's Winter Olympics in Sochi but Selig said it was impractical for baseball.

Because the Olympics are normally held between July and September, MLB would have to shut down for several weeks before the playoffs.

But Porter said the WBSC were still in talks with MLB and confident of coming up with a different solution which would allow some players to compete if the sports are reinstated.

"We've been having excellent, very positive discussions with Major League Baseball, as well as the Major League Baseball Players Association, and we're going to continue to do that," Porter said.

"We think that there's a good relationship there; we know that they want to work with us and help us and we're going to do everything possible to make sure we have them on board working with us and we think that's a positive."

The WBSC bid team includes Antonio Castro, the son of Fidel who ruled Cuba for nearly half a century before stepping down in 2011.

Cuba has dominated Olympic baseball, winning three gold and two silver medals in the five times the sport has been played.

Asked by reporters whether the inclusion of Castro's son would have a negative impact on the bid vote, Porter said his family links were irrelevant.

"He's a great athlete in his own right. He's a professional physician, he's been involved in our sports for many, many years," Porter said.

"We don't want to get into the politics of it. We think that Tony being here is a great representative for the sport."
XXXXX
XXXXX
M.L.B. Suspends Rodriguez and 12 Others for Doping
XXXXX
Steve Eder
XXXXX
Aug. 5, 2013
XXXXX
Alex Rodriguez was among 13 players suspended by Major League Baseball on Monday for violating the league’s antidoping rules, the biggest single-day drug action in the sport’s history.

Rodriguez is planning to appeal his ban, which would begin Thursday and would be for 211 games, through the 2014 season — by far the longest levied by the league for a doping violation. The league cited his “use and possession of numerous forms of prohibited, performance-enhancing substances” over many years.

As baseball announced its sanctions, Rodriguez, the Yankees’ high-profile third baseman, was preparing to make his 2013 major league debut Monday night against the Chicago White Sox. Rodriguez, who has been recovering from hip surgery and a quadriceps strain, is eligible to play until his appeal is heard by an arbitrator, meaning he can probably play out the season with a lengthy possible ban looming.

In a news conference before the Yankees’ game in Chicago, Rodriguez declined to discuss the suspension or accusations that he used banned substances, but he reiterated his intent to challenge the league’s ruling.

Once considered among the best players in the game, Rodriguez received a far stiffer penalty than the others cited by baseball on Monday, who all accepted 50-game suspensions, effectively ending their 2013 seasons. Among the others were three 2013 All-Stars — Nelson Cruz of the Texas Rangers, Everth Cabrera of the San Diego Padres and Jhonny Peralta of the Detroit Tigers — as well as Francisco Cervelli of the Yankees.

Rodriguez is the only player planning to appeal, and the executive director of the players union, Michael Weiner, called his suspension “way too harsh.”

“We’ve never had a 200-plus penalty for a player who may have used drugs, and you know, among other things, I just think that is way out of line,” Weiner said in a call with reporters.

Commissioner Bud Selig, however, said the suspension was within the bounds of the league’s antidoping rules, saying in a statement that baseball “conducted a thorough, aggressive investigation guided by facts so that we could justly enforce our rules.”

Weiner said a ruling on the appeal was not likely before November, which means Rodriguez can presumably play through the rest of the season.

The suspensions issued Monday stem from the league’s investigation into Biogenesis of America, a South Florida anti-aging clinic run by Anthony P. Bosch. With Bosch’s cooperation, baseball claimed its biggest trophies in its fight against performance-enhancing drugs.

For the past six months, since Miami New Times, a weekly newspaper, published its account of Bosch’s providing drugs to professional athletes, including Rodriguez, baseball investigators have intensified their pursuit, going door to door in the Miami area hunting for information to build cases against some of the biggest names in the game.

Major League Baseball was able to persuade almost all the players linked to Biogenesis to accept their punishments despite the apparent lack of a positive test for banned substances. Baseball’s drug-testing program, agreed to by the players union, allows for suspensions based on nonanalytic positives when doping can be proved with other evidence. The league contends that its investigation yielded other convincing evidence — like documents and eyewitness accounts — that implicates the players.

The first of the Biogenesis-related suspensions came last month, when the Milwaukee Brewers slugger Ryan Braun accepted a 65-game suspension without appealing. Braun, the National League’s most valuable player in 2011, failed a drug test that season, but that suspension was overturned on appeal.

Some of the players punished Monday issued statements acknowledging their mistakes, and their teams publicly stated their support for the league’s doping program.

The Yankees said in a statement they would have no comment on the Rodriguez case as it is appealed.

Rodriguez, who was born in New York and grew up in the Dominican Republic and in Florida, has long been under suspicion for using performance-enhancing drugs, which he admitted using for a limited time earlier in his career.

At the start of the 2009 season, Rodriguez was 33 and had 553 career home runs, putting him on track to break Barry Bonds’s career record of 762 by the time Rodriguez reached 40.

As part of the $275 million contract the Yankees negotiated with Rodriguez a year earlier, the club agreed to pay him several million dollars to secure all the rights to market his home run chase, which they believed would be a commercial bonanza. Rodriguez was thought to be on a pace to pass Willie Mays (660 homers), Babe Ruth (714), Hank Aaron (755) and finally Bonds on the career list.

At the time, it seemed that Rodriguez’s breaking the home run record would provide a powerful sign of how baseball had moved beyond the so-called steroids era and would be an important milestone for Selig, who is keenly aware of his legacy and has been criticized for his seeming ambivalence to the issue of doping during the first part of his tenure.

But in early February 2009, Rodriguez’s image as the game’s pristine slugger was shattered. Sports Illustrated published an article that asserted he was among the players who had tested positive in 2003 for performance-enhancing drugs. That test was designed as an anonymous survey and carried no penalties.

Rodriguez subsequently admitted that he had used steroids from 2001 to 2003 — before he played for the Yankees. That prompted Selig to order his investigators to interview Rodriguez about his drug use. In that interview, Rodriguez maintained that he never used drugs after 2003, the last year players did not face penalties for a positive drug test.

Selig and the investigators were not convinced that Rodriguez was truthful, but they had no grounds to suspend him because they could not prove he had been lying.

As suspicions about Rodriguez’s use of banned substances persisted, his play declined in recent years and he sustained injuries that jeopardized his chase of Bonds’s record.

Baseball investigators believe that Rodriguez’s ties to Bosch extend back to 2010, and that the banned substances he used included testosterone and human growth hormone.

In 2011, Rodriguez played in only 99 games, hitting 16 home runs. In 2012, he hit 18 homers and missed six weeks with a broken hand. In the playoffs, he was benched for poor play.

Rodriguez’s apparent resumption of his career while he appeals his suspension, coupled with the other punishments issued Monday, will affect the rest of the baseball season. The developments also played a role in moves made at the trade deadline last month. For example, the Tigers dealt for a shortstop who would replace Peralta, expecting his suspension.

The other players suspended were Antonio Bastardo of the Philadelphia Phillies, Jordany Valdespin and Cesar Puello of the Mets, Jesus Montero of the Seattle Mariners, Fautino de los Santos of the Padres, Sergio Escalona of the Houston Astros, Fernando Martinez of the Yankees and the free-agent pitcher Jordan Norberto. Among the players, only Puello has never played in the major leagues.

In recent months, the continuing investigation and Rodriguez’s injury have prompted a back-and-forth between Rodriguez and the Yankees amounting to a public fight.

On Monday, the Yankees said they felt compelled to address several recent accusations, including Rodriguez’s saying Friday during his rehabilitation assignment that he believed the Yankees and baseball were conspiring against his return.

A statement by the Yankees read, “The New York Yankees in no way instituted and/or assisted MLB in the direction of this investigation; or used the investigation as an attempt to avoid its responsibilities under a player contract; or did its medical staff fail to provide the appropriate standard of care to Alex Rodriguez.”
XXXXX
XXXXX
Report: Some 20 baseball players may face suspension in doping scandal
XXXXX
Ben Brumfield
XXXXX
June 5, 2013
XXXXX
Major League Baseball is set to suspend some 20 players in the coming weeks due to a scandal involving performance-enhancing drugs, according to an ESPN report that said a key figure in the case is now ready to cooperate with investigators.
The network says it is potentially the worst drug-abuse case in the history of U.S. sports.
The league declined to comment to CNN but confirmed that an investigation is in the works.
The players union said Wednesday that players are being interviewed by baseball officials and are represented by attorneys.
"The commissioner's office has assured us that no decisions regarding discipline have been made or will be made until those interviews are completed," the union said in a written statement.
Baseball's highest-paid player, New York Yankee third baseman Alex "A-Rod" Rodriguez, as well as Ryan Braun of the Milwaukee Brewers, are among those facing suspension, ESPN said, citing unnamed sources.
Both have denied recently using performance-enhancing drugs, or PEDs. Rodriguez has admitted in the past to using banned substances when he played with the Texas Rangers in the early 2000s.
A-Rod denies performance-enhancing drugs reports
The league may seek to ban the players for 100 games by counting the doping itself as one infraction and lying about having taken the drugs as a second one, ESPN reported. Major league players can appeal any possible suspensions, as Braun did in 2012.
That year, a drug test showed high levels of testosterone in his body, but the outfielder successfully disputed the testing process, and the suspension was overturned in February.
Asked about the ESPN report Tuesday, Braun said he was sticking by his previous account. "The truth has not changed," he told reporters, declining to comment further.
CNN has not independently confirmed the ESPN report.
A Florida newspaper first leveled doping allegations at Rodriguez in January. The Miami New Times reported that the shortstop and third baseman had acquired the drugs from a now-closed Miami anti-aging clinic called "Biogenesis," run by Anthony Bosch.
Twitter reacts to PED saga
ESPN said Bosch, who allegedly supplied baseball players with performance-enhancing substances, has agreed to cooperate in the MLB investigation. CBS Sports also confirmed Bosch will talk to investigators.
Records obtained by MLB name many players, but league investigators need Bosch to attest to their accuracy and confirm that players were doping, ESPN reported, citing unnamed sources.
The league filed a suit against Biogenesis in March for allegedly supplying PEDs to players and advising them on how to avoid detection during drug tests.
ESPN reported that MLB may drop the suit against Bosch, if he cooperates in its investigation.
MLB sues Florida clinic linked to supplying players with PEDs
Managers tight-lipped
On Tuesday, the managers for the Yankees and the Brewers said little.
"I know Major League Baseball is handling it, and that's all I know," Brewers manager Ron Roenicke told journalists at a post-game news conference in Milwaukee.
Yankees manager Joe Girardi started out dodging reporters who grilled him on ESPN's report after New York's game but softened when it came to his concerns about Rodriguez.
"I always worry about my players, always," he said. "One thing you never want to forget is -- they're human beings."
In January: MLB expands testing for HGH, testosterone
He did not say whether he had discussed the looming scandal with Rodriguez.
"When I talk to Alex, it's baseball-related. That's what it is," Girardi said.
He feared the game he has dedicated his life to will suffer because of the scandal.
"I worry about baseball being affected as a game, the whole thing, and what it's been through in the last 15 years."
What we've learned: A complete timeline
Rodriguez was at the Yankees training facility in Florida on Tuesday, recovering from an injury. He could not be reached for comment. A 100-game suspension could cost him more that $15 million, ESPN reported.
New York outfielder Vernon Wells was discouraged by the scandal.
"We've done so much as a group to try to rid ourselves of conversations like this," he said.
In spite of advances in drug testing, new doping techniques designed to avoid detection keep coming, Wells said.
"There's always someone out there trying to beat the system from a medical standpoint."
XXXXX
XXXXX
New doping scandal shakes Major League Baseball
XXXXX
KTVU.com
XXXXX
June 4, 2013
XXXXX
SAN FRANCISCO — A new report issued Tuesday says Major League Baseball is targeting some of the biggest names in the game in the latest doping scandal.
The report released by ESPN included numerous suspects. Locally, Oakland A's pitcher Bartolo Colon topped the list. The 40-year-old right-hander has already been suspended once for performance enhancers.
Other players named in the report include former MVP Ryan Braun of the Milwaukee Brewers -- who got out of a suspension because of a technicality after the 2011 season -- and New York Yankee Alex Rodriguez, who has admitted using steroids in the past.
Additional players implicated in this latest scandal were Rangers outfielder Nelson Cruz and former A's lefty Gio Gonzalez, who now plays with the Washington Nationals.
All the players have ties to a South Florida clinic that allegedly supplied the performance-enhancing drugs.
At AT&T Park Tuesday night, the Giants were taking on the Blue Jays and a former teammate who is one of the men named in that report.
Melky Cabrera played for the Giants last season, but moved on to Toronto.
MLB suspended him for 50 games last year for using banned substances. Now he may be among the 20 or so athletes looking at 100 game suspensions.
Before Tuesday night's game as Melky Cabrera took batting practice, word spread at the ball park that the onetime Giants fan favorite was at the center of the latest performance enhancing drug scandal.
"I heard people talking about that," said Giants fan Jack Ferrari, who brought his son and his son's friends to the game.
Ferrari said this is just the latest in a string of major league disappointments for the boys he was with.
"They pretty much followed it on their own," explained Ferrari. "They're old enough to read about it and stuff, so they can make a decision to not like him or not."
ESPN is reporting Cabrera is one of 20 or so players Major League Baseball is investigating in connection with the now closed Biogenesis of America facility in South Florida.
The cable sports network reported that founder Tony Bosch reached an agreement to cooperate with MLB's investigation.
MLB is reportedly seeking 100 game suspensions for players involved.
Fans at AT&T Park Tuesday night were divided. Blue Jays fan Chris Lieskovsky flew in from Canada to watch the game. He argued performance enhancing drugs can't help if the player doesn't have talent.
"Eye-hand coordination has got to be there, so steroids only help to a certain extent, you know?" said Lieskovsky. "The rest of it's skill."
But others said cheaters deserve punishment.
"It's sad, but if you're using a sports performance drug, I think you should be suspended," said Giant's fan Jenny Foster.
The founder of Biogensis Bosch could begin meeting with MLB investigators this week. An announcement of suspensions could come before the end of the month.
The MLB players would have the right to contest the charges, even confronting witnesses and disputing evidence in a process similar to arbitration.